---
layout: post
title: Jekyll
date:   2019-03-06 13:35:00 +0100
categories: programming frontend jekyll
permalink: /notes/frontend/jekyll
---

[Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/) is a blog-aware static site generator, written in ruby. It's used for [Github Pages](https://pages.github.com/) and it transforms files written in markdown and liquid into a full HTML web.

## Installation
Pre-requirements:  
* `sudo apt-get install ruby-full build-essential zliblg-dev`
* `sudo gem install jekyll bundler`

## Configuration
The basic config is under `_config.yml`
<!--more-->
## Usage
### Local  
This goes well to test new changes in local. To see how it would look when deployed.

* `sudo jekyll new myBlog` creates a myBlog folder with all to start. _(Only first time)._
* `sudo bundle exec jekyll serve` inside this folder, starts web server at  `localhost:4000`

### Github Pages
Just edit the `.md` files, do a push and it will be automatically updated.

## Code
### file example
It will be automatically rendered. The code btw. `---` tags is metadata for jekyll.

    ---
    layout: page
    title: About
    date:   2019-03-01 16:48:18 +0100
    categories: test post
    permalink: /oh-no/
    ---

    Oh no! This is a new post.


### layouts
Default theme: [minima](https://jekyll.github.io/minima/)  

#### custom theme
Steps to get it running:

1. unzip file
2. run `gem instal jekyll bundler`
3. copy everything from the theme and override everything created by default when `jekyll new myBlog`
4. run `bundle install`
5. vim `Gemfile` and modify the values `wdm` and `>=0.1.0` for `listen` and `~> 3.0`. _(This is because wdm is only for windows. Listen is compatible with Linux)._
6. Modify at `index.md` the current value for `default`
7. `bundle exec jekyll serve`

##### custom changes
1. made home a variable.  
Changed the value `Home` at the sidebar from a constant to a variable. Made this setting a variable into `_config.yml` and calling it at `sidebar.html` with `{{ site.home_sidebar }}`

2. order main menu buttons  
changes at `sidebar.html`. Will need a fix when `liquid` arrays are improved.

        { assign current_index = 0 }
        { for page in site.pages }
        <!-- For every page to check, start a new for loop with counter++ and check if it's the turn for the page to be inserted. -->
            { for p in site.pages }
                { if p.layout == 'page' and p.order == current_index }
                    <a href="{{ p.url | prepend: site.baseurl | prepend: site.url }}" { if p.url == page.url }class="active"{ endif }>{{ p.title }}</a>
                    { assign current_index = current_index | plus:1 }
                { endif }
            { endfor }
        { endfor }

##### twitter handle
At `_config.yml`. I've just changed the variable `twitter_username` for `linkedin_username` as I do not want my Twitter to be public for this kind of things.
