---
layout: post
title: Docker usage
date:   2019-05-06 14:38:00 +0100
categories: programming tools docker
permalink: /notes/tools/docker
---
## Definitions

**Image** Executable package that includes everything needed to run an application.  
**Container** Instance of an image.

**Stack** Defines the interaction of all the services  
**Services** Defines how containers behave in production

**DockerFile**  File which allows us to build upon an already existing image. It defines the base image to build from, our own files to use / append into this image, and the commands to run. At the end, a DockerFile will only be a service, which we will call from _docker-compose_.

**Docker vs docker-compose**
_Docker_ is used when managing a single individual container. _docker-compose_ is used to manage a multi-container application or it may also be used as support to input large customization options, for a single-container app, which otherwise would be needed to input as a parameters in a one-liner.

_Docker-compose_ also moves many of the options you would enter on the docker run cli into the docker-compose.yml file for easier reuse. It works as a _"frontend script"_ on top of the same docker api used by docker, so you can do everything docker-compose does with docker commands and a lot of shell scripting.  
<!--more-->
**Volumes** They are the preferred mechanism to persist data, as docker manages them itself, they do not increment the size of the container using them and the contents of the volume exist outside of the life cicle of a container. They're not suitable to write temporal information.

### Reference(s)
[https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37966552/what-is-the-difference-between-docker-and-docker-compose](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37966552/what-is-the-difference-between-docker-and-docker-compose)  
[https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/](https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/)

## Run without sudo
It's needed to add your user to the docker group  

~~~ bash
sudo groupadd docker
sudo gpasswd -a {$USER} docker
# log-out and -in
~~~

## Docker (single-container, local)
### DockerFile
**TODO:** Check several commands for DockerFile / how-to build one / what's needed / how it works.

### Check installation
~~~ bash
docker --version
docker info
docker version
docker run hello-world
~~~

### Administration
#### System
* `docker {$command} --help` show possible options for a command  
* `docker system prune` general clean (delete all containers, cache, images etc)
* `docker stop {$CONTAINER_ID} | xargs docker rm` stop and delete a container in a one-liner

#### DockerFile
* `docker build -t {$image_name} -f {$docker_file_name} .` build image from DockerFile

#### Images
* `docker images` list images
* `docker rmi {$image_id}` remove image  
  * `-f` force remove  


* `docker run -d {$IMAGE_ID}` run image as a container, daemon mode
* `docker run -it {$IMAGE_ID} /bin/bash` run image as a container, interactive mode
* `docker run -p {$REAL_PORT}:{$IMAGE_PORT} {$IMAGE_ID}` run image, map ports
  * `--rm` the container will delete itself when stopped.
  * `--name {$NAME}` name which will be given to the container
  * `--mount source={$VOLUME_NAME},target={$PATH_IN_CONTAINER}` give a specific volume to use  

~~~ bash
# Create a volume named "ohno"
docker volume create ohno
# Creates a container of an image, in interactive mode, which will have access
#   to the "ohno" volume every time it's started.
docker run -it --name=volumetest --mount source=ohno,target=/app ubuntu:latest
~~~

##### Examples  
Examples ready with the real, binded parameters the apps need. Only run once and from then on just start the container.
~~~ bash
# Mongo container with a persisted volume binded to mongo folder and maps the port
docker run -d --name mongo_werder --mount source=mongo_werder,target=/data/db -p 27017:27017 mongoclient/mongoclient:latest
~~~
~~~ bash
# Portainer
docker run -dp 9000:9000 -v "/var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock" --name 'portainer' portainer/portainer
~~~

#### Containers
* `docker ps` list **only** running containers
  * `-a` all containers, even stopped
* `docker stop {$container_id}` stop a container
* `docker container prune` delete all the stopped containers
* `docker rm {$id}` delete a container

#### Volumes
* `docker volume create {$name}` create a new volume
* `docker volume ls` list
* `docker volume inspect {$volume_id}` see a volume's details
* `docker volume rm {$volume_id}` delete

## DockerHub (Remote)
### External repositories
* `docker login` log-in in DockerHub
* `docker login -u msanchez {$repository}` log-in in private repository


* `docker search {$thing_to_search}` explore hub repositories
* `docker pull {$thing}:latest`
* `docker run {$thing}:latest`

### Own repositories
* `docker tag {$image_name} {$username}/{$repository}:{$tag}` tag an image
~~~ bash
docker tag friendlyhello mariocodes/ubuntu-notes:first-tag
~~~


* `docker push {$username}/{$repository}:{$tag}` publish an image  
* `docker run {$username}/{$repository}:{$tag}` run remote image

### Reference(s)
[https://cloud.docker.com/](https://cloud.docker.com/)  
[https://hub.docker.com/search/?q=&type=image](https://hub.docker.com/search/?q=&type=image)  

## Docker compose
### Administration
* `docker-compose ps` list running, docker-compose containers
* `docker-compose run <service> <process>` run a process in a specific container service
~~~ bash
docker-compose run php bash
~~~

### Containers
* `docker-compose up --build -d` start container as daemon
  * `--build` starts it with rebuild
* `docker-compose stop` stop containers, gracefully
* `docker-compose kill` stop containers, brute force

### Logs
* `docker-compose logs` show logs from all containers
  * `-f` Show logs from all containers and follow
  * `-f <service>` Show logs from a single service container and follow

## Versions
Docker handles versions with Tags.   
**TODO:** Complete with examples.

## How-to's
### Interactive shell on compose service
Get into the `docker-compose.yml` folder and run the following commands.  
~~~ bash
docker-compose run -d {$SERVICE_NAME}
docker exec -it {$CONTAINER_NAME} /bin/bash
~~~
