---
layout: post
title: Docker
date:   2019-03-15 12:13:00 +0100
categories: programming tools docker
permalink: /notes/tools/docker
---
## Definitions

**DockerFile** -  Defines what goes in the environment inside the container. It's needed to map ports and the files "to copy" in that environment.  
**Image** - Executable package that includes everything needed to run an application.
**Container** - Runtime instance of an image. (image in-memory).

**Stack** - Defines the interaction of all the services  
**Services** - Defines how containers behave in production

**Docker vs docker-compose**
The docker cli is used when managing individual containers on a docker engine. It is the client command line to access the docker daemon api.

The docker-compose cli can be used to manage a multi-container application. It also moves many of the options you would enter on the docker run cli into the docker-compose.yml file for easier reuse. It works as a front end "script" on top of the same docker api used by docker, so you can do everything docker-compose does with docker commands and a lot of shell scripting. See this documentation on docker-compose for more details.

### References
[https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37966552/what-is-the-difference-between-docker-and-docker-compose](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37966552/what-is-the-difference-between-docker-and-docker-compose)
<!--more-->
## Docker compose
### Up and down
* `docker-compose up --build -d` Start containers (with rebuild) in the background
* `docker-compose stop` Gracefully stop containers
* `docker-compose kill` Non-Gracefully stop containers

### Manage
Run a process in a specific container/service
_(for example)_ `docker-compose run php bash`

~~~ bash
docker-compose run <service> <process>
~~~

List containers from the currently running docker-compose environment

~~~ bash
docker-compose ps
~~~

### Logs
Show logs from all containers

~~~ bash
docker-compose logs  
~~~

* `-f` Show logs from all containers and follow
* `-f <service>` Show logs from a single service container and follow

## Docker
### Versions
Docker handles the versions by Tags  

**TODO: Find and write examples**

### Run an image from a public repository
I want to search for `busybox`, pull the image and run it.

~~~ bash
docker search busybox
docker pull busybox:latest
docker run busybox:latest
~~~

### Commands in Local
#### DockerFile  

**TODO: Check several commands for DockerFile / how-to build one / what's needed / how it works.**

#### Check version & correct installation

	docker --version
	docker info
	docker version
	docker run hello-world

#### Management
##### Commands help
* `docker` all commands
* `docker {$command} --help` help for a specific command

##### System
*	`docker system prune` - deletes all containers, cache etc

##### Containers  
* `docker ps` see only running containers
* `docker ps --all` see all containers, even stopped
* `docker container stop {$container_id}` stop a container
* `docker rm {$id}` delete a container

##### Images
* `docker images` see all images
* `docker rmi {$image_id}` remove image
* `docker rmi -f {$image_id}` Force remove
* `docker build -t {$image_name} -f {$docker_file_name} .` build image from DockerFile

##### Run app
This will start the container, run it **and instantly get it down**.

	docker run golang:1.8

* `-p` mapping port. ex: `docker run -p {$real_port}:{$image_port} {$image_name}`
* `-d` run as daemon
* `-it` interactive shell

### Commands in Remote
#### Log-in

	docker login -u msanchez docker-repository.(redacted)

#### Tag an image

	docker tag {$image_name} {$username}/{$repository}:{$tag}
	ex - docker tag friendlyhello mariocodes/ubuntu-notes:first-tag

#### Publish an image

	docker push {$username}/{$repository}:{$tag}

#### Run a remote image

	docker run {$username}/{$repository}:{$tag}

#### Explore hub repositories

	docker search {$thing_to_search}

#### References
[https://cloud.docker.com/](https://cloud.docker.com/)  
[https://hub.docker.com/search/?q=&type=image](https://hub.docker.com/search/?q=&type=image)
